{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww15840\viewh11860\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs24 \cf0 Dia de los Muertos\

\b0 \
Dia dos Muertos is a Mexican 3 day celebration of remembrance for the departed. On the first night (October 31) the spirits of animals are allowed to return to the land of the living. On November 1st, (Dia de los Inocents) children are allowed to return. Finally, on November 2nd (Dia de los Muertos) The adults may return. \
\
People build elaborate and beautiful altars (ofrendas) covered with food flowers, sugar, and salt. Towns are strewn with elaborate paper cuts and statues of brightly colored skeletal figures. Shops offer various sugar sculptures of animals and skulls, as well as a sweetened bread with the top of loaves representing bones (Pan de Muerto). During the celebration, cemeteries are lined with marigolds and candles. Everywhere is the image of Catrina, a skeletal woman wearing an elaborate plumed hat. \
\
\

\b Object of the Game
\b0 \
\
The players play 3 hands, one for each night of the Dia die Los Muertos celebration. They capture cards by playing the highest card to each trick, keeping the scoring cards between hands. Each pair of a Food card with a Muertos card (Animal, Child, Adult) is worth 1 point.  The team with the most points at the end of the third round wins. \
\

\b Preparation
\b0 \
\
The main game of Dia die Los Muertos is played by 4 players in two teams of partners. A 3 player variant for advanced players is provided at the end of the rules. \
\
Partners sit opposite each other at the table. \
\
Separate the Food (9 cards) and the three types of Muertos (the fours: Animal, Child, and Adult: 12 cards) into nearby face up piles. For the first hand, shuffle the rest of the cards along with 3 of the Food cards and the 4 Animal cards. \
\
Then deal each player 7 cards facedown from the 28 card deck. \
\
For the second hand, you will use 3 more Food cards and the 4 Child cards along with the core deck. The third hand will use the last 3 Food cards and the Adult cards. \
\
When a trick is finished, cards played will be tuned face up and sorted so that all players can see what has been played so far in the hand. However, scoring cards which have been captured are instead kept by the team who won the trick in order to keep score. \
\
\

\b Playing a Hand
\b0 \
\

\b The Basics\
\

\b0 The player who received the Start card (6) goes first in the first hand and plays the Start card face up in the center of the table. \
\
Each other player (going clockwise) plays one card until everyone has played a card. \
\

\b Note: 
\b0 When you play your card, you want to play it slightly closer to you to make it clear which player played which card. It is a little harder in this game than most card games to work out who won a trick. \
\
The highest card player wins the trick. If multiple cards are played of the same rank, the first card of that rank played wins the trick. \
\
The winner of the trick collects any scoring cards (Food and Muertos) that were played in the trick and adds them to the partnership\'92s scoring cards. These cards remain face up in front of that player. \
The rest of the cards are sorted by rank and placed face up on the side of the table. \
The player who won the trick Exchanges Gifts if a scoring card (or a Spoiled card) was captured. \
The player who won the trick plays a card to begin the next trick. \
The hand ends when 8 tricks have been played.  \
\

\b Complications\

\b0 \

\b Suit: 
\b0 \
A black card may always be played to a trick. (Exception: The Spoiled card can keep you from playing black Food cards)\
The other three colors (pink, green, and blue) may only be played ONCE in a trick. \
\

\b Example:
\b0  On the first trick, Frank leads the Start card (Black 6). Mark then plays a Pink 7. Sandi plays a Blue 8. Sheldon is last to play to the trick, but may only play a green or black card from his hand. Black may always be played, and pink and blue have already been played in this trick. \
\
It is entirely possible that a player will not be able to play a valid card. In this case, the player chooses any card from his hand and sets it aside,  adding it to the face up cards at the side of the table. The invalid card is not considered when evaluating who won the trick. If it is a scoring card, it is NOT won by the winner of the trick. (1 or 2 Muertos cards per hand are often removed from the game in this manner.)\
\

\b Gift Exchanges:
\b0 \
Whenever the player who wins a trick captures a scoring card (Food, Muertos, or the dreaded Spoiled card), he must exchange cards with the player on his right. The player on the trick-taker\'92s right selects a random card form the trick-taker\'92s hand. That player then looks at the card, and then chooses any card from his hand (including the card just taken) and gives it to the trick-taker. \
\
If a player captures more than one scoring card in the same trick, only one card is exchanged. \
\

\b Special Cards:
\b0 \
\
Several cards have some effect when played and are noted with a word or symbol on the card. \
\

\b 2 - Food and 4 - Muertos (Animal, Child, Adult)
\b0 \
These are scoring cards. Capturing these in a trick also forces a gift exchange with the player on your right. \
\

\b 0 - Choose
\b0 \
The player names a color when playing this card. The card counts as a card of that suit for restricting what colors players after you may play. You may choose black, 
\b but you may NOT choose the color matching the Muertos cards shuffled in for this round. 
\b0 \
\

\b Note:
\b0  This is easily the most forgotten rule in the game. Each hand already has 8 cards matching the Muertos color thanks to the 4 Muertos cards. With only 8 tricks in a hand, allowing the Choose card to be the Muertos color would just lead to a bigger pile of unscored Muertos cards at the end of the hand.\
\

\b 0 - Spoiled
\b0 \
When played this card prevents Food cards from being played after it in the trick. It does not affect Food cards which were played before Spoiled was played. \
Spoiled also forces whoever takes the trick to suffer through exchanging gifts, even if no scoring cards was captured in the trick. \
\

\b 0 - Ask
\b0 \
As this card is played, the player may ask a question of any player in the game.  The question must be able to be answer by a \'93Yes/No\'94, a number from 0-10 or a color.\
\
Possible questions include:\
\'93What is the highest card in your hand?\'94\
\'93What color do you have the most of?\'94\
\'93How many 10 cards do you have?\'94\
\
You are allowed to ask yourself a question (this is done to reveal information about your hand to your partner.)\
The answer given must be truthful. \
\

\b 1 - Swap
\b0 \
When this card is played, the player also hands a card across the table to his partner. The partner then looks at the card, and then choose a card to give back to the player who played the Swap card. The card returned may be the card which was just passed. \
\

\b Strategy Tip:
\b0  A common convention for the first swap in a hand is to pass the highest card. The next most common pass is a Food card because you have 2 or 3 of them. \
\

\b 3 - No 10
\b0 \
At the end of the trick, each 3 played cancels one 
\b opponent\'92s
\b0  10 which was played to the same trick. The 10 goes to the discards and cannot win the trick. \
Each 3 can only remove one 
\b opponent\'92s
\b0  10 from the trick. \
A 3 never removes a partner\'92s 10. \
\

\b 6 - Start
\b0 \
The player with this card leads it to start the first trick in a hand. \
\

\b End of the Hand
\b0 \
\
At the end of the first and second hands, add three Food cards and the next set of Muertos cards (Round 2: Child, Round 3: Adult) cards to the deck. Reshuffle and deal 8 cards to each player. \
Scoring cards captured by players remain face up next to them to note score. Scoring cards which were not captured are removed from the game. \
\

\b End of the Game
\b0 \
\
After the third hand, determine the winner. The partnership that captured the most pairs of cards (1 food and 1 Muertos card) wins. The cards need not have been captured on the same trick, or in the same hand in order to be paired for scoring. \
\
If both teams have the same number of pairs, the winning team is the team with the most Food cards. If they are still tied, then the team with the most Muertos cards. \
\

\b Scoring Examples:
\b0 \
Sandi and Frank collected 4 Food and 6 Muertos cards during the game. Mark and Sheldon collected 5 Food and 5 Muertos cards. Mark and Sheldon win, as they have the most complete sets (5 to 4). \
In a grudge match, Sandi and Frank collect 4 Food and 5 Muertos cards. Mark and Sheldon capture 4 Food and 4 Muertos cards. Both have the same number of sets and Muertos cards, but Sandi and Frank win by the second tiebreaker of having more Muertos cards. \
\

\b Variant - 3 players:
\b0 \
\
With three players, you will need a scorepad with two columns for each player. The game lasts three hands, with each player in turn partnered with a dummy hand against the other two players. This version is somewhat more difficult, and it is suggested to play this with players who are familiar with the four player game. \
\
Like the four player game, cards are dealt normally. The Dummy\'92s hand is turned face up opposite the current round\'92s partner. The Dummy\'92s partner chooses all of the Dummy\'92s actions. \
\
If the Dummy wins a trick, the player to the Dummy\'92s right CHOOSES the card to take from the Dummy\'92s hand as part of the gift exchange. (This is the part that makes this variant significantly harder than the 4 player game.)\
\
At the end of each hand, note down for each player seperately what cards his partnership captured during the round. Total the collected cards for each player seperately at the end of the third hand to determine the winner. \
\

\b Special \'93Kingmaker\'94 scoring rule: 
\b0 If one of the two human partners realizes at the start of the third hand that they cannot win the game, they are considered to share victory if the partner wins. \
\

\b Strategy Tips:
\b0 \
\
1. This game makes no sense at first, even for experienced card players. The first few hands will always be baffling, but you will start to see patterns of useful play emerge. \
2. The third player tends to have most control over actually winning a trick. This is VERY different from normal suit-following games which gives all of the control to the first player. \
3. A weak lead of a 1 or 0 can be dangerous. That shifts control from the third player a bit to the enemy sitting to your right. \
4. Gift exchanges are useful tools. If you have a terrible hand, giving up a scoring cards which is useless to your opponents in exchange for a chance to rob their hand is a nice tactic. Hanging on to those scoring cards until the end of the rounds usually results in their powerful cards taking 2 or 3 at once. You want to space those out to lessen the impact. \
5. Leading Muertos cards is more useful than it sounds. It is high enough to win a trick, and can only be beaten by 9 cards. (The 10\'92s, and two colors of 5,7,8). \
\

\b Sample Hand:
\b0 \
\
Frank leads a 0-Choose, selecting Blue as the color. \
Mark plays a 4-Green (Animal) scoring card. \
Sandi has a 10-Black, 8-Blue, and a 5-Blue. Her best play is probably either the 5-Blue or the 10. If she plays the 10, Sheldon can only win the trick with the Black-3 or the Blue-3 (which cancel her 10, allowing Mark\'92s lowly 4-Animal card to win the trick.)\
If she plays one of her Blue cards, then all three colors are in the trick which forces Sheldon to play a black card. There are only two 10\'92s possible which could be used to win the trick. (Sandi has the third 10). \
The Blue-5 also may force She;don to play a 2-Food if he is stuck without other black cards in his hand. \
\

\b Credits: 
\b0 \
Game Design: Frank Branham & Sandi West (moo@swampcastle.net)\
Editing/Development: Jim Dietz \
Artwork:\
Layout:\
\

\b Playtesters:
\b0 \
J.D. Forinash, Idris His, Kathy Peters, Mark Jackson, Sheldon Smith, Eddie Maise, Tery Noseworthy, and the old crew from the War Room. \
\
\
\
\
\
\
}